---
title: '.5 TB Server'
date: 2006-09-10T14:21:00.000-07:00
draft: false
xurlx: /2006/09/5-tb-server.html
tags: 
- General
---

While rebuilding our home file server I realized that I had about .5 TB of disk space.  This is spread across four different sized harddrives but if you add up the total space it is over 600 GB.  It is not the full Terabyte server that I’ve been wanting to build but it is a step in that direction. 

  

And I’m not doing any RAID.  I will be doing [rsync snapshot backups](http://www.mikerubel.org/computers/rsync_snapshots/index.html "Mike Rubel rsync backups") to one of the harddrives so I am loosing already half my space.  When I get enough $$$ I will get more drives and attempt some RAID or Linux LVM.

  

I am using Ubuntu on the machine.  I started down the road of using straight Debian but soon got real tired of trying to figure out how to make things work.  With Ubuntu I would say that 80 to 90% of my hardware problems went away and I didn’t have to hunt down any drivers or figure out why I couldn’t get a higher screen resolution.  My last file server I used Gentoo which rocks, by the way, but I have gotten to the point where I don’t want to spend days just setting up the OS.  As it is it has taken me a while and multiple installs of Ubuntu just to get the server into a state that I like it.

  

Next is setting up a Subversion instance on the machine.  It would be a great thing to have my own SVN server that I can get to when ever I need.  After that I need to clean up my tech library.

  

It just never ends.